### Environment Variable Configuration: 

```
# PRODUCTION
NODE_ENV=production
PROD_USERNAME=postgres
PROD_PASSWORD=ravi
PROD_DATABASE=todo
PROD_HOST=db
PROD_DIALECT=postgres

# DEVLOPMENT
DEV_USERNAME=postgres
DEV_PASSWORD=ravi
DEV_DATABASE=todo
DEV_HOST=db
DEV_DIALECT=postgres

DATABASE_URL=postgres://postgres:ravi@db:5432/wd-todo-dev
```

DATABASE_URL: This variable holds the connection URL for your development database.

## Production Environment:
  1. NODE_ENV: Specifies the environment as production.
  2. PROD_USERNAME: Username for accessing the production database.
  3. PROD_PASSWORD: Password for accessing the production database.
  4. PROD_DATABASE: Name of the production database.
  5. PROD_HOST: Hostname of the production database server.
  6. PROD_DIALECT: Specifies the dialect for the production database (e.g., postgres).

## Development Environment:
  1. DEV_USERNAME: Username for accessing the development database.
  2. DEV_PASSWORD: Password for accessing the development database.
  3. DEV_DATABASE: Name of the development database.
  4. DEV_HOST: Hostname of the development database server.
  5. DEV_DIALECT: Specifies the dialect for the development database (e.g., postgres).

In both environments, we are using PostgreSQL as the database.
The variables for username, password, database name, host, and dialect are used for configuring the database connection.

# Docker compose for devlopment
```
version: "3.8"
services:
  app:
    build:
      context: .
      target: dev
    image: todo-app:devlopment
    volumes:
      - .:/app
    ports:
      - "3000:3000"
    env_file:
      - .env
    depends_on:
      - db
  db:
    image: postgres:15
    volumes:
      - pg-dev-data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    env_file:
      - .env
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USER: $DEV_USERNAME
      POSTGRES_DB: $DEV_DATABASE
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: $DEV_PASSWORD

volumes:
  pg-dev-data:

```

# Docker compose for production
```
version: "3.8"
services:
  app:
    build:
      context: .
      target: production
    image: todo-app:production
    volumes:
      - .:/app
    ports:
      - 3100:3000
    env_file:
      - .env
    depends_on:
      - db

  db:
    image: postgres:15
    volumes:
      - pg-dev-data:/var/lib/postgresql/data
    env_file:
      - .env
    environment:
      POSTGRES_USER: $DEV_USERNAME
      POSTGRES_DB: $DEV_DATABASE
      POSTGRES_PASSWORD: $DEV_PASSWORD

volumes:
  pg-dev-data:

```

# Docker File
```
FROM --platform=$BUILDPLATFORM node:lts-alpine as base
WORKDIR /app
COPY package.json /
EXPOSE 3000

FROM base as production
ENV NODE_ENV=production
RUN npm i -g husky
RUN npm install pm2 -g
RUN npm install
COPY . /app
CMD node index.js

FROM base as dev
ENV NODE_ENV=devlopment
RUN npm install pm2 -g
RUN npm install -g nodemon && npm install
COPY . /app
CMD npm run start

```



## PM2 Cluster Mode Deployment

PM2 offers cluster mode deployment for Node.js applications, which allows you to take full advantage of multi-core systems by running multiple instances of your application across available CPU cores. This can significantly improve performance and scalability. Here's how you can deploy a Node.js application in cluster mode using PM2:

```
pm2 start index.js -i max
```
The command pm2 start index.js -i max is used to start a Node.js application (index.js in this case) using PM2, with the -i flag specifying the number of instances to run and max indicating that PM2 should create as many instances as there are CPU cores available on the machine.

Here's a breakdown of the command:
    1. pm2: This is the command-line utility for managing Node.js applications.
    2. start: This is the sub-command used to start a new process or application with PM2.
    3. index.js: This is the entry file of the Node.js application that you want to run. Replace index.js with the path to your application's entry file.
    4. -i max: This option specifies how many instances of the application should be created. When max is used, PM2 will spawn as many instances as there are CPU cores available on the machine. This is typically used to take advantage of multi-core systems and distribute the workload across multiple processes, thereby improving performance and scalability.

In summary, pm2 start index.js -i max is a command used to start a Node.js application using PM2, with PM2 automatically spawning as many instances of the application as there are CPU cores available on the machine, allowing for efficient utilization of system resources.

```
pm2 logs
```
The command pm2 logs is used to view the logs of applications managed by PM2. It displays real-time logs from all running processes managed by PM2.

Here's a breakdown of the command:
    pm2: This is the command-line utility for managing Node.js applications.
    logs: This is the sub-command used to view logs.
    
When you run pm2 logs, PM2 aggregates logs from all applications and processes it's managing and displays them in real-time in the terminal. This can be useful for monitoring the behavior of your applications, debugging issues, and keeping track of any errors or warnings that occur during runtime.


```
pm2 stop logs
```
The command pm2 stop all is used to stop all processes managed by PM2. When you execute this command, PM2 will stop all running Node.js applications and processes that it's currently managing.\

Here's a breakdown of the command:
    pm2: This is the command-line utility for managing Node.js applications.
    stop: This is the sub-command used to stop a process or application managed by PM2.
    all: This keyword is used to specify that you want to stop all processes managed by PM2.

When you run pm2 stop all, PM2 will send stop signals to all running processes, allowing them to gracefully shut down. This command is useful when you want to stop all applications managed by PM2 at once, such as during system maintenance, server shutdown, or application updates.

It's worth noting that stopping processes gracefully allows them to clean up resources and perform any necessary shutdown procedures before exiting, which helps prevent data loss or corruption.

## Security Measures

# Securing Environment Variables:

  1. Store sensitive information like API keys, database credentials, and other secrets as environment variables.
  2. Avoid hardcoding sensitive information directly into your codebase.
  3. Use a .env file to manage environment variables during development.
  4. Ensure the .env file containing sensitive information is added to .gitignore to prevent accidental exposure in version control systems.
  5. Utilize a library like dotenv to load environment variables from the .env file into your Node.js application.
  6. Consider using a secrets management service for more secure storage and retrieval of sensitive information, especially in production environments.

# Employing HTTPS:
  1. Use HTTPS to encrypt data transmitted between your Node.js application and clients.
  2. Acquire a valid SSL certificate from a trusted Certificate Authority (CA). This can be obtained through services like Let's Encrypt, or you can purchase one from a CA.
  3. Configure your Node.js server to use HTTPS. This typically involves creating an HTTPS server instance using Node.js's built-in https module or using a reverse proxy like Nginx or Apache with SSL termination.
  4. Enable HSTS (HTTP Strict Transport Security) to instruct browsers to only connect to your application over HTTPS.
  5. Consider implementing secure headers such as Content Security Policy (CSP), X-Content-Type-Options, X-Frame-Options, and X-XSS-Protection to enhance security further.